                       README for X11R6.9 and X11R7.0

                            The X.Org Foundation

                              21 December 2005

                                  Abstract

     X11R6.9 and X11R7.0 are Open Source versions of the X Window System
     that supports many UNIX(R) and UNIX-like operating systems (such as
     Linux, FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD and Solaris x86) on Intel and other
     platforms.  This version is compatible with X11R6.8 and other X
     window system implementations which support the X11R6 standard.

1.  What are X11R6.9 and X11R7.0?

X11R6.9 is the ninth and final full release in the X11R6 series, and X11R7.0
is the first release in the new X11R7 series.

The 6.9 version is a new release that includes additional hardware support,
functional enhancements and bug fixes.  The 7.0 version is built from the
same source code as the 6.9 so it contains the same additional hardware sup-
port, functional enhancements and bug fixes; however, it has been split into
logical modules that can be developed, built and maintained separately, but
still fit together coherently into the larger source code base as they have
in the 6.9 tree.  Specific release enhancements can be viewed in the Release
Notes.

X11R6.9 and X11R7.0 are being released at the same time to assist in the
transition from the older monolithic source tree to the new modular source
tree.  It will take time for everyone to make this transition, so we will
maintain the older X11R6 series through update releases to both X11R6.9 and
X11R6.8.

Most modern PC video hardware is supported in both releases, and most PC
video hardware that isn't supported explicitly can be used with the "vesa"
driver.  The Release Notes has a table showing the drivers provided with
X11R6.9 and X11R7.0, and links to related documentation.

The X.Org Foundation X releases are produced by the X.Org Foundation.  The
X.Org Foundation has been formed as a Delaware corporation organized to oper-
ate as a scientific charity under IRS code 501(c)(3) chartered to develop and
execute effective strategies which provide world-wide stewardship of the X
Window System technology and standards. Membership in the X.Org Foundation is
free to all participants. Applications for Membership are now being accepted,
and active participants in the further development of the X Window Technology
are invited to complete a membership application
<URL:http://www.x.org/XOrg_Foundation_Membership.html>.  The X11R6.9 and
X11R7.0 codebase forms the fourth X Window System release since the formation
of the X.Org Foundation and includes code from the X Consortium, the Open
Group and the XFree86[tm] project.  This release is dedicated to the greater
X community, developers and users alike.

2.  Licensing

X Window System source code is covered by many licenses.  All of these
licenses have in common the fact that they do not impose significant condi-
tions on the modification or redistribution or either source code or binaries
beyond requiring one or more of the following:

  1.  Copyright and/or license notices are left intact.

  2.  Copyright and/or license notices are reproduced verbatim in documenta-
      tion accompanying binary distributions.

  3.  Attributions are included with documentation accompanying binaries.

Most of these licenses are based on the MIT, X Consortium, or BSD (original
and revised) licenses.  All of them are consistent with the Open Source Defi-
nition, and most are consistent with the Free Software Foundation's Free
Software Definition.

Copyright and Licensing information for X, including the reproduction of
copyright and/or license notices and attributions required by some of the
licenses for binary distributions, can be found in the License Document.  If
you find any omissions in that document, please contact us with details at
<xf_board@x.org>.  While the current licenses are all open source licenses,
the X.Org Foundation is attempting, with time, to bring as much as possible
of the code's licenses in the distribution into compliance with the Debian
Free Software Guidelines.

3.  Pointers to additional information

The documentation for this release can be found online at the X.Org web site
<URL:http://wiki.x.org/>.  Information about binary distributions and the
attendant installation instructions can be found in the Installation Docu-
ment.

The X11 version numbering system (including historical information) can be
found in the Versions Document.

Additional information may be available at the X.Org Foundation Wiki
<URL:http://wiki.x.org/>.

4.  The Public Mailing Lists

Current information about the X.Org Foundation public mailing lists is avail-
able on the X.Org mailing list page <URL:http://lists.x.org/mail-
man/listinfo/> and related desktop technology mailing lists can be found on
Freedesktop.org's mailing list page <URL:http://freedesktop.org/mail-
man/listinfo>.

5.  Contributing to the X.Org Foundation's X efforts.

If you have any new work or enhancements/bug fixes for existing work, please
send them to <xorg@freedesktop.org> or to our bug tracking system
<URL:https://bugs.freedesktop.org/> using the xorg component.  This will help
ensure that they are included in future releases.

6.  How to get the release

Information about X11R6.9 and X11R7.0 can be found from the X.Org Foundation
wiki at <URL:http://wiki.x.org>, and at mirrors of this server.  Information
about obtaining and installing binary distributions of this release can be
found in the Installation Document.

Note that both X11R6.9 and X11R7.0 are being released simultaneously but only
one source tree is required to build the release.  Information about obtain-
ing the release in source form is given below.

6.1  X11R6.9

The source for version 6.9.0 is available as a single tarball:

     X11R6.9.0-src.tar.gz

and also is available split into seven separate tarballs:

     X11R6.9.0-src1.tar.gz
     X11R6.9.0-src2.tar.gz
     X11R6.9.0-src3.tar.gz
     X11R6.9.0-src4.tar.gz
     X11R6.9.0-src5.tar.gz
     X11R6.9.0-src6.tar.gz
     X11R6.9.0-src7.tar.gz

The first three of the separate tarballs contain everything except the fonts
and general X11 documentation.  Those three are sufficient for building
X11R6.9 if you already have a set of fonts.  The fourth and fifth contain the
fonts.  The sixth contains the source for the general X11 documentation.  The
seventh contains the general X11 documentation in hardcopy format.

6.2  X11R7.0

This is the first release of the new modular source code tree.  The souce
code has been split into nine logical modules: app, data, doc, driver, font,
lib. proto, util and xserver.  Each of these modules contain one or more
packages that can be configured, built and installed separately.  Please see
an X11R7.0 release site for a complete list of the tarballs.

For information on how to build the modular tree packages see the Modular
Developer's Guide <URL:http://wiki.x.org/wiki/ModularDevelopersGuide>.  This
guide also contains information for developers who want to help improve the
modular build system and modular code base.

6.3  The current development tree

The X source code for this and all releases/snapshots as well as development
versions can also be accessed via the Freedesktop.org CVS repository.  It's
also possible to browse the freedesktop CVS repository
<URL:http://cvs.freedesktop.org/xorg/>.  The CVS tag for the 6.9 version is
"XORG-6_9_0" and the CVS tag for the 7.0 version is "XORG-7_0_0".  The CVS
tag for the stable branch for the %relvers; release is "XORG-6_9-branch".

To check out the latest development version, don't specify any tag.

7.  Reporting Bugs

Bugs should be reported to bug tracking system <URL:https://bugs.freedesk-
top.org/> using the xorg component.  Before reporting bugs, please check the
server log file, which can be found at /var/log/Xorg.0.log on most platforms.
If you can't resolve the problem yourself, send the entire log file with your
bug report but not the operating system core dump.  Do not edit the log file
as our developers use it to reproduce and debug your problem.  Please attach
it to your bug report.

     Generated from Id: README.sgml,v 1.6 alanc Exp $.


$XdotOrg: xc/README,v 1.4 2005/12/21 05:39:04 kem Exp $
