'\" -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH nxdialog 1 "Mar 2019" "Version 3.5.99.19" "NX Dialog"
.SH NAME
nxdialog \- NX Dialog Helper
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBnxdialog\fR \fI[-h] [--dialog DIALOG_TYPE] [--message TEXT]
         [--caption CAPTION] [--display DISPLAY] [--parent AGENTPID]
         [--window WINDOW] [--class DLGCLASS] [--local]
         [--allowmultiple]\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBnxdialog\fR is a GUI helper that can be used with nxagent to provide
user interaction on certain events inside nxagent. It adds graphical
widgets (menus, dialog boxes, etc.) to nxagent that allow a smarter user
interaction with the agent.
.PP
\fBnxagent\fR is not using \fBnxdialog\fR by default, set the
\fI$NX_CLIENT\fR environment variable to make the \fBnxdialog\fR path known to
\fBnxagent\fR.
.PP
If you want to disable \fBnxdialog\fR usage in \fBnxagent\fR, then make
sure that the \fI$NX_CLIENT\fR environment variable is unset.
.PP
.SH COMMAND LINE OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show this help message and exit.
.TP 8
.B --dialog DIALOG_TYPE
Type of dialog to show, one of "yesno", "ok", "error", "panic", "quit", "pulldown", "yesnosuspend".
.TP 8
.B --message \fITEXT\fR
Message text to display in the dialog.
.TP 8
.B --caption CAPTION
Window title of the dialog.
.TP 8
.B --display DISPLAY
X11 display where the dialog should be shown (default: \fI$DISPLAY\fR).
.TP 8
.B --parent AGENTPID
PID of the nxagent. The agent PID can be 0 for testing \fBnxdialog\fR.
.TP 8
.B --window WINDOW
X11 id of window where to embed the pulldown dialog type.
.TP 8
.B --class DLGCLASS
Class of the message (info, warning, error) default: info) [currently unimplemented].
.TP 8
.B --local
Specify that proxy mode is used [currently unimplemented].
.TP 8
.B --allowmultiple
Allow launching more than one dialog with the same message [currently unimplemented].

.SH AUTHOR
The \fBnxdialog\fR application has been derived from Google's
NeatX client application by Ulrich Sibiller <uli42@gmx.de>.
.PP
This manual has been written by Mike Gabriel
<mike.gabriel@das\-netzwerkteam.de> for the X2Go Project
(https://wiki.x2go.org) and the Arctica Project
(https://arctica-project.org).
